### LTER Information Management Committee Virtual Water Cooler

### 2019-09-19

**Attending**: S. Bohm (rapporteur), R. Brown, D. Bahauddin, E. Dobbins, J. Downing, S. Earl, M. Gastil-Buhl,  C. Gries, K. Hall, L. Kui, J. Laundre, G. Maurer, A. Nguyen, J. Porter, S. Remillard (rapporteur), A. Sapp, M. Servilla, C. Turner, T. Whiteaker

Two topics were discussed during this water cooler:

1. the future of Databits
2. the group's general sentiments about holding the 2020 IMC meeting in conjunction with the annual meeting of the Ecological Society of America.

The discussion of Databits was a continuation of discussions that began at the IMC meeting in Bloomington, IN, and, particularly, the 2019 IMC meeting in Tacoma, WA. Results of a survey distributed to the IMC (plus several others) were considered as part of the discussion ([survey results](https://srearl.github.io/databits-survey-2019/)).

### Databits

Gastil: site byte more internal

Jim: news from the IM and science. DB more about upcoming things and what people have done. fits in with a blog.  move site byte to site news?
maintaining community vs outreach.  get larger audience with a wider array of sources.

Jim, enjoy reading right before the meeting to see who to talk to. meeting prep. 

John top things on techniques/tools etc. What is the best way to approach. The newness is in the eye of the beholder, since to be experienced means it might not be news to but it would be to someone else. topic based. What tools are you using to address a problem.

Corinna. We had site bytes that were themed. in  the past. Is there space at the LNO for Data bits. Where would there be a space for IM communication? were we can do our own thing.  Zoho now looking for different framework. 

John. Is it better off at EDI or LTER?

Corinna. make it themed and broader and it could be at EDI.

Gastil. Would be more comfortable writing for EDI audience. 

C. if we have an editor to collate, we could work it out.

Jon would we need comments?  and moderation. Mark. I think there is a moderation system in place.  

Stevan. How will it work. Keep the editor model. Every few weeks or more batched.

John. if it's only once a month. Send out a challenge periodically. How do we deal with reports? such as vtc reports? Mostly short articles. 

Suzanne, Call goes out to several month. Articles come in at the beginning and at the end.

John.  How would you deal with the issue. Formulate a good question.

Suz lot of work every month. maybe every month, try it. 
Once a year concat everything.

tim. In a blog format things would already be formatted.

John. it worked out that. Work out a series of topics. to schedule monthly.

C. Once a month, what is ready what needs to be imported. Needs to gather ideas? Maybe still need to ask directly. do you have  an idea. before the meeting have a sitebyte. John. Who has an idea for next month. 

Jason. like the idea of blog. when working groups have meetings and reports. into a format that could be shared more widely.

John. but maybe extract a bit out to share. Keeping track of what people are working on.

Sven will check with with Marty and Corinna to see what would be available

Dan. like consensus view. Sitebytes before the meeting like. 

Ren√©e. no topic. likes themed site byte. to provide structure.

Li. Annual report. Question. What to write into the annual report. info on how to do that.  top question in the next 3 weeks.

Suzanne. Proposal language, database core areas. discussion how do you do the reporting 

Gregg. Second that. help with reporting requirement. "how to write a good annual report" keep an eye on what the community is doing. What is new? 

C. PI's are sharing proposal. We could share annual reports and proposals.  

Jim Usually post past proposals on our site. 
"critique"?

Adam. second the how to write an annual report. 

Chris.  useful before the meeting. History of how lter im has changed. Make sure things are archived. 
moving forward with the blog.

### 2020 IMC meeting

Next IMC meeting. Looks we will have similar resources for next year. ESA in 2020 Aug in Salt lake city. also coincides with decadal review. thoughts about association with ESA. Session proposals are due 19th of September.  poster session on open data. data use stories. not sure what is happening with regard to decadal review. Would be different format.  40 year review committee is planning on several sessions.  "Inspire" sessions every 15 seconds. Look up.  Open Science is inactive, looking to make it active. To show here we are. this is how we support open science. Poster submission deadline is in Feb. General Abstract in Feb. Data helpdesk. 

Gastil. Still have an IM meeting day.

John.  C there are 3 types, "inspire" "oral" and "poster" session.

John. session on dos and dont's of data. how to cite and co authorship.

C. have everyone submit and abstract and they might all end up the same session.

Stevan. Go as part of the data workshop.

Adam. thumbs up.

kris: good.

Greg: great.

Jim great.

edobbins: great.

### why archive data

John. [why archive data](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1dYd2P9F0IxLjypPX-yRtoO3AluyvR3eW/view) not for discussion, but what to do about it?
