## LTER Information Management Committee Virtual Water Cooler
June 8, 2020

**Topics:** 1. Summer meeting announcements, and 2. best practices developed by the non-tabular working group

**Participants (24):**

Dan Bahauddin (CDR)
Stace Beaulieu (NES)
Emery Boose (HFR)
Renèe Brown (MCM; organizer)
Elizabeth Dobbins (NGA)
Jason Downing (BNZ)
Marty Downs (LNO)
Stevan Earl (CAP, rapporteur)
Sarah Elmendorf (NWT)
Hap Garrit (PIE)
Corinna Gries (NTL/EDI)
Kris Hall (SEV)
Li Kui (SBC)
James Laundre (ARC)
Mary Martin (HBR)
Greg Maurer (SEV)
An Nguyen (BLE)
Margaret O'Brien (EDI)
John Porter (VCR)
Suzanne Remillard (AND)
Adam Sapp (GCE)
Chris Turner (NGA)
Kristin Vanderbilt (FCE/EDI)
Tim Whiteaker (BLE; organizer)
Yang Xia (KNZ)

Renèe provided announcements regarding summer meeting plans

ESA has decided to have a virtual meeting. As a result, IM Exec has decided that we would forego having a virtual meeting in advance of ESA, and instead will consider business items during the August water cooler. Business items include: identifying successors for Jason and Dan (EB representative). Renèe invited members to self nominate. IM Exec will send more details about logistics via email. Because of the cost savings of ESA going virtual, we can now send an IM representative to the ESIP summer meeting, also to be virtual, as well. For both meetings, ESA and ESIP, the LNO will cover the costs of registration fees and will do so as a group so that IMs will not have to register and be reimbursed, but rather will provide a code (to be provided) at the time of registration and the LNO will be billed for the cost. Unfortunately, we have missed the window to propose sessions at ESIP owing to the late announcement from ESA but we can still make a strong showing, and encourage many participants. Marty suggest that, as much as possible, participants should highlight the LTER brand by, for example, listing "LTER" in their zoom ID. In a follow-up Renèe noted that we should still be able to submit an abstract for a poster at ESIP.

Renèe and Tim introduced the non-tabular group best practices working group and document

An overview by Tim:

The non-tabular group started with the EML best practices to expand on and develop a new data package best practices resource, including for non-tabular data.

Best practices for non-tabular data are included in the Best Practices for Data Package Design section. There are drafts for several non-tabular best practices that are ready for review. Tim walked through an example of best practices for documenting code, such as including code meta. If we were to all follow these practices, it would create a more uniform experience for users. Further, it would allow EDI (or others) to develop new or improved functionality based on commonly applied practices.

Reviewers should use issues of the best practices GitHub repository to offer suggestions.

This non-tabular working group has a folder in the IM Google Drive where they do most of their work before moving materials to GitHub once they are more developed.

Renèe provided further detail and facilitated a discussion:

They are still developing best practices for drones, spatial data, and field notebooks and other documents. Many of these best practices have evolved from the interests of particular community members. For example, Tim and An were particularly interested in documenting code so they contributed to a sub-working group focused on that type of data.

Noting that not all of these materials were developed organically, and, in some case, drone data for example, they are drawing on resources already developed by other data managers or entities.

Renèe inviting other IMs to contribute to this effort, and inviting more members to the group. Please reach out to Renèe, Tim, or Corinna. The group would also like feedback on data types they have not been addressed but for which there is a need.

These are living documents and, though we may have specific versions at some point, for the time being they can evolve as needed. Corinna added there could be a somewhat organic versioning where there could be a version when this working group disbands.

Margaret added that the decision to use Bookdown was partly to facilitate creating a PDF, for example, but we would need to think about what you stamp on that PDF - e.g., would we put a version number on such a document at that moment? The EML section is mostly a markdown version of what was in the most recent PDF version of the EML best practices.

Renèe noted that the spatial data best practices should be available soon, and this was confirmed by Mary Martin, who noted that much of the remaining work is to address the formatting such that it is consistent with the other sections of the document.

Gastil noting that they are working on best practices for video separately from still images.

Best practices around spatial data consider whether data can or should be documented as <otherEntity> or <spatilRaster> of <spatialVector> based on the capabilities of the site.

Hap noting that we need a wide range of examples for best practices to attempt to capture the nuances of data and sites, and for folks to test these best practices.
