## LTER Information Management Committee Virtual Water Cooler

2019-12-16

**Attending:** ~~S. Beaulieu~~, ~~D. Bahauddin~~, E. Boose, R. Brown, S. Earl (rapporteur), J. Downing, M. Downs, S. Elmendorf, M. Gahler, H. Garritt, M. Gastil-Buhl, C. Gries, K. Hall, D. Henshaw, ~~L. Kui~~, M. Leon, M. Martin, G. Maurer, A. Nguyen, M. O'Brien, J. Porter, S. Remillard, M. Servilla, C. Turner, K. Vanderbilt, T. Whiteaker, ~~Y. Xia~~

**Topics:**

1. Including organizations as data set authors
2. Authorship for long-term data sets

**Topic I**: Including organizations as data set authors

In the EDI data catalog, if a data set features only organizations as authors, they are included in the auto-generated citation. However, if an organization and people are listed as authors, only people show up in auto-generated citation. To circumvent this, BLE treats organizations as people, though not comfortable with this hack approach. What is appropriate in this case, should organizations be authors and should they be listed as equal authors?

Gastil: Stuffing anything other than a person in a person attribute is a very bad practice.

John Porter: Really discussing authorship. If we adding an organization as an author, that suggests that a person author could not be identified. There are other places in EML where organizations can be documented.

Margaret: Has the group (IMC) gone through the ESIP authorship [guidelines](https://esip.figshare.com/articles/Data_Citation_Guidelines_for_Earth_Science_Data_Version_2/8441816). Generally, Margaret reads the guidelines as indicating that authors should be people.

Don: This shows up for Andrews with long-term databases. Often, creators are deceased and/or there are many people associated with the data set in various capacities but that may no be associated any longer - in these cases having LTER as an author is helpful but need to be careful not to dismiss the contribution of people.

Tim: BLE site personnel insist that the site is an author (to promote the site) - they insist that the site should be the first thing that is viewed.

Hap: PIE puts PIE in the title, which tends to avoid the authorship issue. Also, PIE is listed as the publisher (though EDI changes this such that EDI is the published). Gastil commented that MCR does this also.

Margaret: Not sure that EDI actually changes the publisher to EDI, nor is Mark sure, they need to check.

Hap: Noted that there is a mixed bag of if and when sites include the site id in the title.

John: VCR changes the contact information on data sets where the authors/investigators are deceased or otherwise no longer accessible.

Margaret: SBC considering how to address attribution in light of PI changes; they tend to like keeping the original authors to preserve the legacy and appropriate attribution.

John: Uncomfortable ever removing an author since they did contribute at one point.

Tim: Associated party allows to add contributors in any capacity. BLE uses a generic contact (as opposed to John's approach of a person contact).

Suzanne: What is the purpose, to identify what sites do or to establish best practices?

Tim: Ideally, we should have a best practice for how to include the site in a citation, and then how that is in the auto-generated fields produced by EDI?

Tim: So, is there a best practice for site attribution?

Gastil: We do not have control over how others use our data/metadata? We do have control over the title of the data, and putting MCR in the title is close to ensuring that MCR receives attribution.

Margaret: In a local display, you can remove the site string from the title for a cleaner look (but it is still there in EDI, DataONE, etc.).

Suzanne: But the site in the title is not the same an being listed as an author.?.

John: From ESIP, the name of the individuals or organizations who contributed to the work. Many times, we list an organization if we do not know the individuals. Organization as an author also helps in cases where there is a large number of contributors who are only considered contributors because of their associated with the organization (and not necessarily for having contributed directly to the work).

Corinna: Should EDI display an organization in addition to the people, otherwise it should be up to the site?

Suzanne: That is a good approach, but Gastil's point is that that it is not just EDI as there are other entities that list and display these data sets.

Tim: DataONE includes the organization and people. Recall that EDI will include the organization in the display if there are not people.

Corinna: This should be left up to the site as it will not include search, and, even with a best practice, it will be difficult to standardize.

John: Again, we should not list organizations as people just so that they show up.

Margaret: Should we consider what is an organization, and what is an LTER site? If something is a project, does that make it an organization?

Corinna: It seems that this is really aesthetic and just to accommodate PIs.

Margaret: SBC tends to place emphasis on the human authors.

Tim: Authors should be those who get credit for the work, whether that be an organization or people.

Corinna: EDI should make the decision to display organizations and people. Done!

Gastil: A best practice at one point indicated that the organization should be listed as the first creator; will change template such that the organization appears last.

Tim: Can we conclude that we will ask EDI to list also organizations?

This seems like the generally agreed approach, and the order of display will depend on how the EML is constructed - that is the order of authors will be dictated by their position in the document (instead of, for example, organizations always first).

Corinna: Cautioning that using an organization as an author makes citing much more difficult.

Gastil: Should be a usage analysis conducted, and this is a classic example of things that EML allows but that should not be done (the subject being multiple people in a single creator entity).


**Topic II**: Authorship for long-term data sets

Tim: For long-term data sets, it is possible that the number of contributors can grow over time. How best to deal with this? BLE lists on BLE as an author and includes a CSV of contributors and when they contributed.

John: How critical is it that we all do this the same way?

Corinna: Names help with data set search. May no longer be an issues but there have been cases in the past where people could not find a data set based on the name of a site PI (e.g., NSF program officer who expected site data to show up under the PI name).

John: VCR has not reached the crisis level of the number of authors. One option is to break up a data set into the individual author components (Corinna: that would be awful).

Corinna: Why is this a problem, can we not just cite these as et al.?

Gastil: Excluding authors is missing metadata.

Margaret: Common patterns of usage would be interesting.

John: Likes BLE's approach of using a CSV for additional information (not necessarily instead of).

Corinna: Provided an example of a data set with many authors [link](https://portal.edirepository.org/nis/mapbrowse?packageid=knb-lter-ntl.10001.3).

John: Asking if folks have gotten an ORCiD for their sites?

Margaret and Corinna: Cannot get an ORCiD or RoR for an LTER site.

**Conclusions**

* EDI will (or at least look into) displaying organizations in addition to people, with the order being dictated by the order of the authors in the EML.
* That only one name/person should be listed in a single creator should be a best practice.
* Mark suggesting that the change (displaying organizations) could be addressed in January (depending on the level of priority).
* Mark can introduce the aforementioned change to staging before production so that users can preview the change.

**Follow-up**

* Corinna: EDI is following ESIP guidelines that the repository should be included as the publisher.
* Suzanne: Don is retiring so we may or may not see him in the future.
* Margaret: There is a GitHub pages sites for best practices; it is almost ready, and should be out early 2020.
