## LTER Information Management Committee Virtual Water Cooler
2019-08-19

**Attending**: D. Bahauddin, S. Beaulieu, J. Conners, E. Dobbins, J. Downing, M. Downs, S. Earl (rapporteur), S. Elmendorf, M. Gastil-Buhl, M. Gahler, C. Gries, K. Hall, D. Henshaw, L. Kui, J. Laundre, M. Martin, G. Maurer, A. Nguyen, M. O'Brien, J. Porter, A. Sapp, P. Tarrant, C. Turner, K. Vanderbilt, T. Whiteaker, Y. Xia

IMKEY - Information Management Knowledge Exchange

Topic for today is looking at different types of software for activities and project management. This is the first of the series of IMKEY sessions.

Jason inquiring about Slack use (lots of hands), GitHub (lots of hands), SVN (few hands), Google suite (few hands)

Jason starting off talking about Trello and how IMExec uses it, Greg will talk about this also, Phil (Tarrant) will talk about teamwork, and Liz Dobbins will talk about Flowdoc.

Jason provided an overview of Trello's Kanban structure, indicating that IMexec does not use Trello in a classic swim-lane style, but demonstrates the more traditional swim-lane style of use.

Greg speaking to Trello use at JRN. Workflow centers on an AssemblyLine style approach. They use Trello to track the progress of each data package. Their Trello approach is the more traditional swim-lane approach, including to do, in progress, published to stating, and published to EDI. Once published, they will email the PI(s) relevant to that data package. An idea was to use Trello to interact with the PI but in reality it has turned into a primarily internal tool for the IM team.

Phil spoke about Teamwork. His group have used Basecamp, Smartsheets, Trello, Asana, and have now settled on Teamwork. Teamwork focuses on task-based project (e.g., web development), which is like Trello but with vastly more functionality.

Liz spoke about Flowdoc, which is more of a communication tool while you are working on a project. Works well for participants working remotely. It is a lot like Slack, has Bots through an API, has integrations with Trello and other products, messages are fully functional so support images, files, and markdown. There is a per user fee. The API may provide some advantage relative to Slack. Liz finds it easier to follow because it is presented more business-like/compact.

As a follow-up, Phil gave a brief introduction to Microsoft Teams touting particularly its tight integration with Office 365.

One follow up question (to the group) was how to keep track of all your Teams, Slack channels, etc.?
