## LTER Information Management Committee Virtual Water Cooler
March 9, 2020

**Topic:** LTER Synthesis Working group titled, “Integrating plant community and ecosystem response to chronic global change drivers.” (Kim Komatsu and Meghan Avolio)

**Participants (26):** Kim Komatsu (KNZ; presenter), Meghan Avolio (KNZ; presenter), Renee Brown (MCM), Suzanne Remillard (AND; notes), Stevan Earl (CAP), An Nguyen (BLE), Jason Downing (BNZ), Li Kui (SBC), Yang Xia (KNZ), Sarah Elmendorf (NWT), Corinna Gries (NTL/EDI), John Porter (VCR), Marty Downs (LNO), Liz Dobbins (NGA), Dan Bahauddin (CDR), Kristin Vanderbilt (FCE/EDI), Stace Beaulieu (NES)

In the March water cooler Kim Komatsu and Meghan Avolio, co-PIs of an LTER Synthesis Working group titled, “Integrating plant community and ecosystem response to chronic global change drivers.” will share with us their process for gathering datasets, assembling them into an informal database for synthesis, and writing functions for the Codyn R package. 

For more details about their synthesis working group and to see the many products that were developed: https://lternet.edu/working-groups/integrating-plant-community-ecosystem-responses-chronic-global-change-drivers-toward-explanation-patterns-improved-global-predictions/

The water coolers are recorded for viewing and reviewing by members of the IMC. The recordings will be available only through Google Drive and retained for only six months before being deleted.

Here are the VWC connection details:
Join Zoom Meeting
https://ucsb.zoom.us/j/664969166


**Notes:**

Kim Komatsu and Meghan Avolio and presented a slideshow on their data gathering and synthesis process.

Questions:

Renee - What would you do differently next time (collecting data and writing R packages) or what would you suggest to others?

Sarah - How do you deal with data sharing of the derived data and what is your data policy?

Suzanne - Data acquisition for LTER data; You said you asked people for data rather than using data in a repository; was the data structure different between these provided data and what you would find in a repository? Do you have advise for data providers for what they could provide and what format that would be more helpful for a similar project?

Stevan - Do you feel that the data that go into a data aggregation project should be published before it's used? What was the approach or secret to get additional funding?

John - You sent our standardized spreadsheets for people to use to provide data. Our experience is that this does not work very well. Can you comment on this approach?
Stace - How were you able to harmonize the species list that came to you from so many different people?

Li - Has been trying to integrate data using R, but has experienced issues with reading datasets due to messy data. At what stage do you use your R package in the cleaning package? How does your R package for biodiversity differ from say VEGAN?

An - How did you refine your criteria for data that you used (>3 years; >5 replicates; herbacious communities; manipulation) and was it informed by what is available?