## LTER Information Management Committee Virtual Water Cooler

January 13, 2020

**Topic:** Next generation climate and hydrology database request of comments on the recommendation

**Participants:** Suzanne Remillard (AND; moderator and some notes), M. Gastil-Buhl (MCR; notes), Stevan Earl (CAP; notes), Tim Whiteaker (BLE), An Nguyen (BLE), Miguel Leon (LUQ), Sarah Elmendorf (NWT), Corinna Gries (NTL), Greg Maurer (JRN), John Porter (VCR), Margaret O’Brien (EDI), Mark Gahler (NTL), Renee Brown (MCM), Mark Servilla (EDI), Marty Downs (LNO), Hap Garritt (PIE), Mary Martin (HBR), Jason Downing (BNZ), Li Kui (SBC), Yang Xia (KNZ), Adam Sapp (GCE), Wade Sheldon (GCE), Sven Bohm (KBS), James Conners (CCE, PAL), Liz Dobbins (NGA), Lindsey Rustad (USFS Hubbard Brook), Nina Lany (USFS Hubbard Brook, ?), Laurie Porth (USFS Research Data Archive), Dave Rugg (USFS Research Data Archive), Chris Oishi (USFS Coweeta), Frederica (Freddie) Wood (Fernow)

**Context:**

A discussion about the forthcoming RFC concerning the next generation climate and hydrology database.  The working group has vetted this proposed plan of action and would like to get feedback before having our rep (Dan) present the final recommendation to the EB.  IMEXEC feels that the feedback from our 2018 all-site survey was positive for harmonized climate and hydrology datasets and with the IMC recommendation of this proposed approach developed by the WG.  We regard this contribution to CUAHSI as a value added approach and an opportunity to use existing cooperative services and common tools for better distributing data.  

We would also like to invite other contributors to the old CLIMDB and HYDRODB systems to participate in this discussion and provide their feedback on the proposed RFC.  Our colleges at organizations like the USFS who have a history with this system are welcome to join in our discussion so please forward this message to other interested parties.

Here is the cleaned-up RFC:

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1krnV9Cl6jpT38FYQzRowJzxDCU8RE2V1FcJovHHiJ8U/edit#heading=h.tvoevv5b8dw8](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1krnV9Cl6jpT38FYQzRowJzxDCU8RE2V1FcJovHHiJ8U/edit#heading=h.tvoevv5b8dw8)

**Notes:**

Introduction

Lindsey:

There are several FS folks on this call, and they will host a follow-up call to determine what they would like to do.

They would like to archive data with EDI, and will investigate how to cross-walk that effort with archiving FS data.

FS is very enthusiastic about the initiative, and are eager to embrace FAIR principles.

Hap:

For part B, there are raw data and those data that we would convert to CUASHI, which would go to EDI? Suzanne responded that raw data would go to EDI, and sites would convert those raw data to the ODM format for upload to CUASHI.

With ClimDB there was control over the metadata (e.g., attribute name), will there be any such control over the data that go into CUASHI? Suzanne responded that CUASHI does have a controlled vocabulary, and there will be recommendations as to the specific vocabulary and/or vocabulary elements to use. Corinna responding that CUASHI has metadata tables that each site will populate (this only needs to be done once). Corinna/EDI has developed recommendations for the process, and there is a script that converts data into the ODM format using the metadata tables; Corinna will continue to develop the instructions and script.

John:

To Wade and Corinna, what needs to be done as a group and what needs to be done site-by-site? Wade responding that CUASHI is really designed for individuals/labs to contribute data with the idea being that one would fill out the metadata templates with site, methods, etc. details. The working group has already mapped the ClimDB details to the CUASHI format. Each site will need to provide the metadata in the metadata templates, which would mostly need to be done one time but updated if sites move or new ones come online, for example. Once the initial metadata and data are provided, scripts can be run to automate data updates to the initial submission. There is then a lot of potential for sharing tools and scripts for these efforts. Corinna adding that the EML will be consistent for all sites since the CUASHI table structure will be identical for all. Wade adding that he has a robust, tested solution to take data from the existing ClimDB to CUASHI. Still need to work out a process of augmenting the sparse metadata (e.g., limited coordinates) and updating other metadata like contacts. Wade a...

Corinna adding that the semantics are more important than the technology. So, for example, some stations may be LTER and FS, how do we keep those all findable? Everyone who starts an account at CUASHI needs to stick to whatever details are adopted for consistency.

Tim adding that CUASHI gives the ability to use a custom title, so we could use a keyword in the title. Corinna agreed but we need to resolve that everyone follows that decision.

Miguel:

Already has CZO data in CUASHI. Suzanne keyed on this asking how do we make connections to existing data? Tim adding that there is nothing special about CUASHI that would necessarily lead you to an LTER site, you get all data, which a beauty of it. Renee pointing out that the whole point of having Clim and Hydro DBs is to more easily synthesize data across sites, which is not practical with data from EDI, so consistency is important, and how to make existing data (e.g., those of Miguel's) will be a challenge. Tim noting that, once the data are in CUASHI, when you pull the data, they are all in the same structure so CUASHI standardizes the data structure, though time intervals and methodology could be different. Wade noting that the CUASHI model is different from what we are used to in terms of versioning, for example, so some training to use this model may be required.

Lindsey:

How to tag sites so one can search for all the LTER or FS data? Also, existing data in ClimDB are aggregated at different intervals, this should be standardized.

Lindsey:

Feels that the standardized scripts that CUASHI provides are immensely valuable that will facilitate use.

John:

Perusing CUASHI, and it may be a valuable exercise to try to get data out of CUASHI once we have data in CUASHI to get a better sense of the potential. Is there a plan to develop tools or just use what CUASHI provides? Lindsey responded that she found the CUASHI tools clunky but that they provide a solid foundation for refinement.

Suzanne:

Noting that this discussion is centered on a request for comments, and inquiring if the Information Managers have any thoughts on the proposal, is everyone comfortable with the plans? Similarly, the FS folks will address a similar exercise. Wade commenting that it may be beneficial for the Working Group to have another meeting to consider some additional details, like time steps? Sarah commenting that she is confused about how many times data need to be submitted versus are there automated harvesters? Corinna noting that there is no automated harvesting, and that all data uploads will be the IM's responsibility. Suzanne adding that Andrews is planning to start small with a few data sources, then, possibly, expand to more or all data streams once they establish the workflow. John noting that this is a valuable approach in that we are leveraging the resources of CUASHI. However, a negative is going through another process of making available the same data that will already be available in EDI. John is hopeful that we can add value to CUASHI by not only providing data but putting into helping to develop tools for working with the data. Lindsey suggested we should develop of list of existing tools. Wade adding that once we decide on a common platform that that absolutely increases the value and realizability of creating common tools. Hap asked about harvesting USGS data. Wade responded that whether to continue with that aspect is not resolved; for sure, we will archive anything in Clim/Hydro DB currently but what to do with USGS going forward is not clear, possibly, but not clear - USGS has a relationship with CUASHI so that may already be addressed and we want to avoid having two data sources.

Yang

Mary: Unclear how much this will happen on FS versus LTER site but like the approach.

Li: Happy with the approach.

Greg: Happy with the approach. Jornada has a lot of new weather stations for which they have not archived any data so they will start a new workflow around one of those; JNR has a lot of streaming meteorological data and feels that this will greatly enhance the discoverability and usability of the data.

Nina Laney: Happy with the approach. Nina is a new FS Information Manager at Hubbard Brook.

Chris Oishi (with FS at Coweeta): Will no longer be an LTER site at the end of the year but is interested to get the data into this agreed-upon format. He looks forward to the FS call to discuss the details of the FS data.

Freddie Wood: Concerned about data and process duplication, and looking forward to resolving details in the FS call.

Gastil: Speaking on behalf of Andrew Brooks, he has read the RFC and is impressed with the effort, and would like to be added to the discussion list. Added that MCR has very little meteorological data. Corinna adding that there may be sites that do not have their own weather station and get data from other provides, we should discuss how sites want to handle that. Stevan responded that CAP has both meteorological stations and we harvest data from other sources; harvested sources go into ClimDB, Stevan will have to discuss with the site PIs whether to continue that effort; regardless, CAP will definitely adopt this workflow for the CAP meteorological data.

Suzanne noting that they anticipate workshops to help sites/people getting their data together.

The recommendation from the discussion is that the working group will meet again to consider the suggestions, and they offer that people should feel free to add comments to the document.

